prep release: v1.39.0 (#4597)
apollographql/router: CHANGELOG.md

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

# [1.39.0] - 2024-02-05

## 🚀 Features

> ### Specify trace ID formatting ([PR #4530](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4530))
> 
> You can specify the format of the trace ID in the response headers of the supergraph service.
> 
> An example configuration using this feature:
> ```yaml
> telemetry:
>   apollo:
>     client_name_header: name_header
>     client_version_header: version_header
>   exporters:
>     tracing:
>       experimental_response_trace_id:
>         enabled: true
>         header_name: trace_id
>         format: decimal # Optional, defaults to hexadecimal
> ```
> 
> If the format is not specified, then the trace ID will continue to be in hexadecimal format.
> 
> By [@nicholascioli](https://github.com/nicholascioli) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4530
> 
> ### Introduce support for progressive `@override` ([PR #4521](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4521))
> 
> The change brings support for progressive `@override`, which allows dynamically overriding root fields and entity fields in the schema. This feature is enterprise only and requires a license key to be used.
> 
> A new `label` argument is added to the `@override` directive in order to indicate the field is dynamically overridden. Labels can come in two forms:
> 1) String matching the form `percent(x)`: The router resolves these labels based on the `x` value. For example, `percent(50)` will route 50% of requests to the overridden field and 50% of requests to the original field.
> 2) Arbitrary string matching the regex `^[a-zA-Z][a-zA-Z0-9_-:./]*$`: These labels are expected to be resolved externally via coprocessor. A supergraph request hook can inspect and modify the context of a request in order to inform the router which labels to use during query planning.
> 
> Please consult the docs for more information on how to use this feature and how to implement a coprocessor for label resolution.
> 
> By [@TrevorScheer](https://github.com/TrevorScheer) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4521
> 

Reviewer: Swap order of these to put the headline feature at the top, please!  — also, please call out the "GraohOS Enterprise" banner — both suggestions included within:
 
```suggestion
### Introduce support for progressive `@override` ([PR #4521](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4521))

> ⚠️ This is an [Enterprise feature](https://www.apollographql.com/blog/platform/evaluating-apollo-router-understanding-free-and-open-vs-commercial-features/) of the Apollo Router available on an as-needed basis. It requires the feature be enabled on an organization with a [GraphOS Enterprise plan](https://www.apollographql.com/pricing/). Send a request to your Apollo contact to enable it for your GraphOS Studio organization.

The change brings support for progressive `@override`, which allows dynamically overriding root fields and entity fields in the schema. This feature is enterprise only and requires a license key to be used.

A new `label` argument is added to the `@override` directive in order to indicate the field is dynamically overridden. Labels can come in two forms:
1) String matching the form `percent(x)`: The router resolves these labels based on the `x` value. For example, `percent(50)` will route 50% of requests to the overridden field and 50% of requests to the original field.
2) Arbitrary string matching the regex `^[a-zA-Z][a-zA-Z0-9_-:./]*$`: These labels are expected to be resolved externally via coprocessor. A supergraph request hook can inspect and modify the context of a request in order to inform the router which labels to use during query planning.

Please consult the docs for more information on how to use this feature and how to implement a coprocessor for label resolution.

By [@TrevorScheer](https://github.com/TrevorScheer) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4521

### Specify trace ID formatting ([PR #4530](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4530))

You can specify the format of the trace ID in the response headers of the supergraph service.

An example configuration using this feature:
```yaml
telemetry:
  apollo:
    client_name_header: name_header
    client_version_header: version_header
  exporters:
    tracing:
      experimental_response_trace_id:
        enabled: true
        header_name: trace_id
        format: decimal # Optional, defaults to hexadecimal
```

If the format is not specified, then the trace ID will continue to be in hexadecimal format.

By [@nicholascioli](https://github.com/nicholascioli) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4530

```

This release supports a new configuration that enables baggage items to be added automatically as span attributes. 

If you have several baggage items and would like to add all of them directly as span attributes (for example, `baggage: my_item=test, my_second_item=bar`), setting `baggage: true` will add automatically add two span attributes, `my_item=test` and `my_second_item=bar`.

An example configuration:

```yaml
telemetry:
  instrumentation:
    spans:
      router:
        attributes:
          baggage: true
```

By [@bnjjj](https://github.com/bnjjj) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4537

### Create a trace during router creation and plugin initialization ([Issue #4472](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/4472))

When the router starts or reloads, it will now generate a trace with spans for query planner creation, schema parsing, plugin initialisation and request pipeline creation. This will help debugging any issue during startup, especially during plugins creation.

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4480

> ### Allow to add static attributes on specific spans in telemetry settings ([Issue #4561](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/4561))

Author: ```suggestion
### Allow adding static attributes on specific spans in telemetry settings ([Issue #4561](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/4561))
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

It is now possible to add static attributes to some spans, defined in the configuration file.

```

When the router starts or reloads, it will now generate a trace with spans for query planner creation, schema parsing, plugin initialisation and request pipeline creation. This will help debugging any issue during startup, especially during plugins creation.

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4480

### Allow adding static attributes on specific spans in telemetry settings ([Issue #4561](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/4561))

It is now possible to add static attributes to spans, defined in the configuration file.

Example of configuration:

```yaml
telemetry:
  instrumentation:
    spans:
      router:
        attributes:
          "my_attribute": "constant_value"
      supergraph:
        attributes:
          "my_attribute": "constant_value"
      subgraph:
        attributes:
          "my_attribute": "constant_value"
```

By [@bnjjj](https://github.com/bnjjj) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/4566

## 🐛 Fixes

### Order HPA targets to resolve OutOfSync states ([Issue #4435](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/4435))

> This update addresses an OutOfSync issue in ArgoCD applications when Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) is configured with both memory and CPU limits.
> Previously, the live and desired manifests within Kubernetes were not consistently sorted, leading to persistent OutOfSync states in ArgoCD.
> This change implements a sorting mechanism for HPA targets within the Helm chart, ensuring alignment with Kubernetes' expected order.
> This fix proactively resolves the sync discrepancies while using HPA, circumventing the need to wait for Kubernetes' issue resolution (kubernetes/kubernetes#74099).

Author: ```suggestion
This update addresses an `OutOfSync` issue in ArgoCD applications when Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) is configured with both memory and CPU limits.
Previously, the live and desired manifests within Kubernetes were not consistently sorted, leading to persistent `OutOfSync` states in ArgoCD.
This change implements a sorting mechanism for HPA targets within the Helm chart, ensuring alignment with Kubernetes' expected order.
This fix proactively resolves the sync discrepancies while using HPA, circumventing the need to wait for Kubernetes' issue resolution (kubernetes/kubernetes#74099).
```
